---

layout: research

title: "Collaborative Research: Constraint-based Compliant Mechanism Design using Virtual Reality as a Design Interface"

subtitle: "Iowa State University - Massachusetts Institute of Technology"

image: image002.jpg

---

## Overview
The purpose of this research is to establish an engineering framework
for design of compliant mechanisms based on constraint-based compliant
mechanism design theory and virtual reality. Compliant mechanisms, as
opposed to rigid link mechanisms, achieve motion guidance via the
compliance and deformation of the mechanism's members. The successful
design of compliant mechanisms requires an understanding of solid
mechanics (deformation, stress, strain, etc.) and mechanism kinematics
(properties of motion). As a result, only a fairly narrow, experienced
group of engineers are successful in designing these mechanisms. In
this work, virtual reality will be used to provide a design interface
that supports a more natural way to design and synthesize compliant
mechanisms which will result in creative, efficient and thorough design
of novel new mechanisms.
 
Constraint-based compliant mechanism design theory is a powerful and
rational design process where a desired motion path is first described,
then decomposed into combinations of lines, arc, and rotations which can
be achieved through combining a series of compliant mechanism components
and sub-components. Finally optimization of the size-shape of the
compliant elements within the design is performed to achieve the final
mechanism. Compliant mechanisms are key components of
micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS). Successful design of compliant
mechanisms is crucial to further development of MEMS and other miniature
products. The traditional human-computer interfaces (HCI) of a monitor,
keyboard and mouse are well suited for the design of conventional planar
rigid-link mechanisms where rigid body motion is familiar to all
designers. However, the deformation of flexible links in compliant
mechanisms results in motion that is rarely intuitive and often
three-dimensional in nature. Virtual reality, combined with
constraint-based design methods, will provide a natural
three-dimensional design environment where engineers can rapidly explore
the design space to generate constraint-based design concepts
(topology), evaluate the concepts and perform detailed design.
 
Currently, significant experience is required to design suitable
compliant mechanisms because of the non-intuitive motion of these types
of mechanisms. The result is that most engineers resort to designing
more traditional, rigid-body linkages to provide motion. This research
will culminate in a design framework that will allow a broader group of
engineers to design complex compliant mechanisms, giving them new
options to draw upon when searching for design solutions to critical
problems. This will result in novel mechanism solutions for
manufacturing and product design which have fewer movable joints, are
more robust, and are easily scaled to meet the needs of micro-products.


## Media
- Cylindroid constraint space [JPEG, 313KB](Cylindroid.jpg)
- Hoop surface freedom space [JPEG, 281KB](Hoop_surface.jpg)
- Simple compliant system [JPEG, 381KB](Design.jpg)
- Compliant lumber support:
    - VR design [JPEG, 44KB](Lumbar_VR.jpg)
    - FEA analysis [JPEG, 275KB](Lumbar_FEA.jpg)
    - Physical prototype [JPEG, 200KB](Lumbar_Physical.jpg)
- **Video** Constraint definition [WMV, 2.8MB](constraint_interaction_low_bitrate.wmv) [WMV, 21MB](constraint_interaction_high_bitrate.wmv)

## Personnel
- Dr. Judy M. Vance, Professor and Chair, Iowa State University
- Dr. Martin L. Culpepper, Associate Professor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
- Denis Dorozhkin - Graduate Research Assistant, Iowa State University
- Utkarsh Seth - Graduate Research Assistant, Iowa State University
- Jonathan Hopkins - Graduate Research Assistant, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

## Funding
This project is funded by the [National Science Foundation](http://www.nsf.gov) Grant # 0457041

## Facilities
{{ site.vrac-link }}
