---

layout: research

title: "Interactive Stress Reanalysis in Virtual Reality Utilizing Haptics"

image: hapticsC6.jpg

---

## Overview
The typical steps in the traditional product design process involve
designing a shape, selecting materials, performing analysis, building
prototypes, and testing. Numerous iterations are performed at several steps in
the process in order to achieve a suitable design. When trying to optimize the
design based on shape or material properties, these iterations can often be
time consuming. This limits the number of design possibilities that can be
explored because of the desire to decrease design time.

After an engineer designs a part ultilizing computer
aided design, he or she will typically run a finite element analysis (FEA) on
the part to determine its reliability. If the results from the FEA indicate
that the part will fail and must be re-designed, the engineer redesigns the
part and re-runs the FEA. This continues until the design is acceptable. The
time required to run the FEA hinders the ability of the engineer to experiment
with different designs. This research project seeks to give the engineer a tool
that will allow him or her to interactively change the design and immediately
see the FEA results. The re-design process is done in virtual reality because
it allows the engineer to use natural head and hand motions to view the results
and modify the design. 

An application has been created to implement and test such interactive design
methods. It combines several features into a virtual reality program including:
- Imported CAD geometry
- Engineering analysis results using Reproducing Kernel Particle mesh-free methods
- Real-time shape manipuation with NURBS free-form deformation and subdivision volumes 
- Two fast analysis approximations: linear Taylor series and Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient reanalysis
- Haptic feedback based on stress levels via a PHANToM device

Research continues into several areas of improvement including: adding
automatic optimization routines to the interactive design process, implementing
additional element types such as plates and shells, working with more advanced
material models, and approximating non-linear analyses. The program also has
the ability to interface with the [Tahoe] (http://tahoe.ca.sandia.gov)
analysis software to support a variety of analysis types.

##Media
- Video clip of stress reanalysis in virtual reality [Quicktime MOV, 63M] (M3D-demo.mov)
- A subdivision volume used to deform parts in the application [PNG, 91K] (ffdVolume.png)
- Several models shown in VR [JPEG,34K] (example.jpg) 

## Publications
- Faas, D., A. Fischer, Vance, Judy M. (2007). Interactive Mesh-Free Stress Analysis for Mechanical 
Design Assembly with Haptics. ASME International Design Engineering Technical Conferences
 and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, Las Vegas, NV.
- Fischer, A. and J. M. Vance (2003).PHANTOM Haptic Device Implemented in a Projection
Screen Virtual Environment. 7th International Immersive
Projection Technologies Workshop.Zurich, Switzerland.
- Fischer, A., Vo,
Dao M, Vance, Judy M., (2007). Haptic Feedback To Guide Interactive
Design. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments.
- Fischer,
A. and J. M. Vance (2007). Fast Mesh-Free
Reanalysis with Open Source Software for Virtual Design. AIAA Journal.
- Fischer,
A. and J. M. Vance (2007). Interactive
Manipulation of Mesh-Free Models in Virtual Reality. ASME Journal of Mechanical Design.
- Fischer, A. and
J. M. Vance (2007).Stress Sensitivity
Calculation Methods for Interactive Mesh-Free Reanalysis. Computer Modeling and Simulation Engineering.
- Chipperfield, K., Vance, J.M.,
Fischer, A.(2006) Fast Meshless Reanalysis Using Combined Approximations,
Pre-Conditioned Conjugate Gradient, and Taylor Series, AIAA Journal.
- T.P. Yeh and J.M. Vance (1998). Applying Virtual
Reality Techniques to Sensitivity-Based Structural Shape Design. ASME
Journal of Mechanical Design, 120[4], pp. 612-619 
- Chipperfield, K., Yeh, T-P, Vance, Judy M.(2002). Interactive Product
Development in a Virtual Environment Utilizing Haptics. 2002 NSF Design,
Service and Manufacturing Grantees and Research Conference Proceedings, San
Juan, Puerto Rico, January 7-10.
- Chipperfield, Kurt (2002) Interactive stress re-analysis in virtual reality, Ph.D.
Thesis, Iowa State Univeristy.

##Personnel
- Dr. Judy M. Vance, Professor, Iowa State University
- Daniela Faas, Graduate Research Assistant
- Andrew Fischer, Graduate Research Assistant
- Andy Mckean, Graduate Research Assistant
- Kurt Chipperfield, Graduate Research Assistant

##Funding
This research project is funded by Procter and Gamble. Previouswork has been funded by the
[National Science Foundation] (http://www.nsf.gov).


